Ingress: Add GCP Global Access LB Proposal (#640)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/gcp-lb-global-access.md

---
title: gcp-internal-load-balancer-global-access
authors:
  - "@sgreene570"
reviewers:
  - "@danehans"
  - "@frobware"
  - "@knobunc"
  - "@miciah"
  - "@candita"
  - "@rfredette"
  - "@miheer"
approvers:
  - "@danehans"
  - "@frobware"
  - "@knobunc"
  - "@miciah"
creation-date: 2021-02-09
last-updated: 2021-02-09
status: implementable
---

# GCP Internal Ingress Load Balancer Global Access Option

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [X] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [X] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [X] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

This enhancement extends the IngressController API to allow the user to enable
the "Global Access" option for Ingress Controllers exposed via an Internal Load Balancer
on GCP.

## Motivation

On GCP, Ingress Controllers that specify a `LoadBalancerScope` of `InternalLoadBalancer` are only externally accessible

> when a client is in the same VPC network and Google Cloud Region as the provider's Load Balancer. GCP exposes the

Reviewer: What does "the provider" refer to in this context?  Does it matter, or could we remove "provider's"?  
```suggestion
when a client is in the same VPC network and Google Cloud Region as the Load Balancer. GCP exposes the
```

Author: We can remove "provider's". Thanks!

[Global Access](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/internal-load-balancing#global_access) option specifically for
Internal Load Balancers via an annotation on the given LoadBalancer service. When enabled, the Global Access option allows clients from any
region within the cluster's VPC to connect to the Load Balancer.

### Goals

1. Expose the GCP Internal Load Balancer Global Access Option via a new field in the existing IngressController API `ProviderLoadBalancerParameters` type.

### Non-Goals

> 1. Expose a similar API field for other cloud providers (AWS, Azure, etc.) as GCP is only provider that provides this configuration option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Expose a similar API field for other cloud providers (AWS, Azure, etc.) as GCP is the only provider that provides this configuration option.
```

Author: fixed.

> 2. Change the current default behavior (no Global Access) of Ingress Controller's expose via an Internal Load Balancers on GCP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Change the current default behavior (no Global Access) of Ingress Controller's expose via an Internal Load Balancers on GCP.
```
```suggestion
2. Change the current default behavior (no Global Access) of Ingress Controllers exposed via Internal Load Balancers on GCP.
```

Author: fixed, thanks!

```go
// GCPLoadBalancerParameters provides configuration settings that are
// specific to GCP load balancers.
type GCPLoadBalancerParameters struct {
        // clientAccess describes how client access is restricted for internal
        // load balancers.
        //
        // Valid values are:
        // * "Global": Specifying an internal load balancer with Global client access
        //   allows clients from any region within the VPC to communicate with the load
        //   balancer.
        //
        //     https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/internal-load-balancing#global_access
        //
        // * "Local": Specifying an internal load balancer with Local client access
        //   means only clients within the same region (and VPC) as the GCP load balancer
        //   can communicate with the load balancer. Note that this is the default behavior.
        //
        //     https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/internal#client_access
        //
        // +optional
        ClientAccess GCPClientAccess `json:"clientAccess"`
}
```

The following `GCPClientAccess` string constants are defined to support the new `ClientAccess` field.

```go

> // GCPClientAccess describes how client acecss is restricted for internal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// GCPClientAccess describes how client access is restricted for internal
```

Author: whoops! fixed.

What are the caveats to the implementation? What are some important details that
didn't come across above. Go in to as much detail as necessary here. This might
be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.

### Risks and Mitigations

Enabling the GCP Internal Load Balancer Global Access option may incur more hosting costs from the provider if cross-region Ingress
is used heavily.

Additionally, cluster administrators need to ensure that enabling the Global Access option does not over-expose an
Ingress Controller's front end within the given VPC.

## Design Details

### Open Questions

How often do cluster administrators want an internal load balancer on GCP that can communicate with clients in a different region?

### Test Plan

The Ingress Operator has existing unit tests to verify that the operator renders the correct service definition given an Ingress Controller's `Spec.LoadBalancer` field.
These unit test will be extended to verify that Ingress Operator applies the Global Access LoadBalancer service annotations for Ingress Controllers with
`Spec.LoadBalancer.ProviderParameters.GCP.ClientAccess` and `Spec.LoadBalancer.Scope` properly set.

> The Ingress Operator also has existing e2e tests. These e2e tests will be extended to verify that Ingress Controller's created with the Global Access option enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ingress Operator also has existing e2e tests. These e2e tests will be extended to verify that Ingress Controllers created with the Global Access option enabled
```

Author: fixed

2. Ensure that the LoadBalancer service is created.
3. Ensure that the Ingress Controller works normally.
4. Modify the Ingress Controller's spec so that the `ClientAccess` field is set to `Local`.
5. Ensure that the LoadBalancer service is properly updated with the correct annotations.

Note that testing the actual behavior of the Global Access option from within GCP by using a client in a different region is most likely
not feasible given CI limitations, and most likely unnecessary. In other words, it is most likely safe to assume that GCP Internal Load Balancers
set with the proper Global Access annotations work as described by the [GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine/docs/how-to/internal-load-balancing#global_access).

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

On upgrade, internal LoadBalancer services on GCP will not be updated with the Global Access annotation unless
an Ingress Controller's spec is updated to require so.

On downgrade, the Ingress Operator will ignore the new `GCPLoadBalancerParameters` field for an Ingress Controller and not set any

> Global Access LoadBalancer service annotations.

Reviewer: We don't have logic in 4.7 that would revert the annotation on the service, so the annotation would not be reverted on downgrade, and therefore any setting made on a 4.8 cluster would remain intact after downgrade to 4.7, right?

Author: You are correct. I included this information in the enhancement (and also mentioned that this behavior is not detrimental and easily corrected need be).

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A

## Implementation History

None.

## Alternatives

> A cluster administrator is already free to use a load balancer not managed by the Cluster Ingress Operator to configure these kinds of settings on an Ingress Controller's
> LoadBalancer service.

Reviewer: This could be clearer:
```suggestion
A cluster administrator can already create a custom service that is not managed by the Cluster Ingress Operator.  The administrator can then configure these kinds of settings on the
custom, administrator-managed LoadBalancer service.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! fixed.

### Graduation Criteria

N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

On upgrade, internal LoadBalancer services on GCP will not be updated with the Global Access annotation unless
an Ingress Controller's spec is updated to require so.

On downgrade, the Ingress Operator will ignore the new `GCPLoadBalancerParameters` field. However, in OCP 4.7, the Ingress Operator
does not remove annotations that it did not explicitly set on an Ingress Controller's LoadBalancer service. Downgrading from 4.8
(once this feature is implemented) to 4.7, a `ClientAccess` field of `Global` would effectively remain intact for an Ingress Controller.
This is not detrimental, and if this behavior is undesired, a cluster administrator could simply manually remove the GCP Global Access annotation
from a LoadBalancer service on downgrade.

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A

## Implementation History

None.

## Alternatives

A cluster administrator can already create a custom service that is not managed by the Cluster Ingress Operator. The administrator can then configure

> these kinds of settings on the custom, administration-managed LoadBalancer service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
these kinds of settings on the custom, administrator-managed LoadBalancer service.
```
